Title: Controlled Periodic Synchronization for Efficient Data-Parallel Training

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.21224v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Jul 2026 01:02:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Controlled Periodic Synchronization for Efficient Data-Parallel Training 

Imane Ettifouri a,b, ∗, Mostapha Zbakh a, Claude Tadonki b

> aENSIAS, Mohammed V University in Rabat, Morocco
> bCentre de Recherche en Informatique (CRI), MINES Paris–PSL University, Fontainebleau, France

Abstract 

Data-parallel training relies on frequent gradient synchronization across workers. Standard DDP synchronizes gradi-ents at every iteration, which is effective on fast local-area networks but increasingly sensitive to communication latency and network variability in geographically distributed environments. Periodic methods such as LocalSGD reduce synchro-nization frequency but rely mainly on parameter averaging, which may be insufficient when worker trajectories diverge. This paper studies synchronization frequency as a systems parameter for communication-constrained distributed training. We evaluate Controlled Periodic Data Parallelism (CPDP), a PyTorch-DDP-compatible strategy that alternates local updates with a reconciliation step combining gradient AllReduce and SlowMo parameter averaging. Experiments are conducted on Grid’5000 across intra-site clusters and a cross-site WAN deployment spanning Nancy and Sophia with 16.6 ms RTT. In the main fixed-LR = 0.1 cross-site setting on ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, CPDP achieves the highest peak test accuracy among the evaluated configurations. At K=2, CPDP improves over DDP by +2.28 percentage points but incurs additional wall-clock time. At K=4 in this WAN setting, CPDP improves over DDP by +2.44 percentage points while reducing average wall-clock time by 13 .8% . Direct profiling shows that exposed synchronization time at K=4

is roughly half that of DDP, explaining the improved WAN accuracy–time trade-off. Additional experiments on ViT-S/CIFAR-100 and ResNet-50/TinyImageNet show that CPDP remains competitive with DDP and generally improves over LocalSGD. Learning-rate and SlowMo sensitivity analyses further show that large-scale periodic synchronization is sensitive to the interaction between learning rate, synchronization period, and stabilization. Overall, the results show that synchronization frequency is a practical control parameter for distributed training under communication constraints. 

Keywords: Distributed deep learning, Data-parallel training, Synchronization control, Communication efficiency, Wide-area network training, SlowMo momentum 

1. Introduction 

Distributed training has become essential for scaling modern deep neural networks. Frameworks such as Py-Torch DistributedDataParallel [1] allow models to be trained across multiple GPUs and nodes by synchro-nizing gradients through collective communication op-erations. While accelerator performance has improved rapidly, the scalability of distributed training is increas-ingly constrained by communication overhead and syn-chronization rigidity rather than raw computation. In multi-node environments, frequent gradient aggregation can dominate iteration time, reducing effective hardware utilization and limiting achievable speedup. Recent research has explored system-level optimizations of distributed deep learning infrastructures, particularly in heterogeneous computing environments. Liu et al. [2] proposed HeterPS, a distributed training framework that         

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: imane_ettifouri@um5.ac.ma (Imane Ettifouri ), m.zbakh@um5r.ac.ma (Mostapha Zbakh ),
> claude.tadonki@mines-paristech.fr (Claude Tadonki )

leverages reinforcement learning to schedule neural net-work layers across heterogeneous resources in order to im-prove training throughput and resource utilization. Sim-ilarly, Wang et al. [3] introduced GPARS, a graph-based predictive scheduling method designed to improve resource allocation efficiency in heterogeneous GPU clusters. These works focus primarily on resource scheduling and clus-ter utilization in distributed training systems. In con-trast, this work focuses on the synchronization behav-ior of data-parallel training itself, analyzing how synchro-nization frequency interacts with communication latency and affects convergence in distributed environments. Re-cent efficiency-oriented machine-learning studies have ad-dressed model design and computational constraints in do-mains such as tabular imputation, power-quality classifica-tion, and price prediction [4, 5, 6]. Complementing these application-level efforts, this work focuses on synchroniza-tion frequency, collective communication, and parameter reconciliation as system-level efficiency mechanisms for data-parallel distributed training. Synchronous data-parallel training remains the default strategy for scaling deep neural networks. In this paradigm, each worker computes gradients locally and arXiv:2607.21224v1 [cs.DC] 23 Jul 2026 participates in collective communication operations; typ-ically AllReduce to maintain model consistency. While this approach preserves stable convergence behavior and simplifies reasoning about optimization dynamics, it in-troduces strict per-step synchronization barriers. Empiri-cal analyses of distributed training workloads show that, beyond modest cluster sizes, collective communication fre-quently lies on the critical path, particularly in bandwidth-constrained multi-node deployments [7, 8, 9, 10]. As a consequence, scaling efficiency may degrade even when lo-cal computation is well optimized. In practice, modern frameworks such as PyTorch overlap the NCCL-based gra-dient AllReduce with the backward pass, so communica-tion does not appear as a separate timing term in simple instrumentation [1]. This makes it difficult to isolate the communication pressure inside the backward phase with-out dedicated profiling. In cross-site WAN deployments, where bandwidth is limited and latency is high, DDP’s overlapped backward phase can exhibit substantial time inflation, while the per-step global barrier exposes the op-timization process to straggler effects and network jitter. Recent systems research has focused on reducing ex-posed communication latency through improved schedul-ing and runtime-level optimizations. Techniques such as tensor-level reordering, GPU-driven collectives, and communication–computation overlap mechanisms [11, 12, 13] demonstrate that careful orchestration and scheduling of collective operations can substantially improve utiliza-tion. However, these approaches preserve the fundamen-tal iteration-synchronous execution model of data-parallel training. Gradient synchronization remains enforced at ev-ery mini-batch step, and the global optimization trajectory remains tightly coupled across workers. These observations raise an important research question: is per-step global synchronization always necessary in prac-tical deployments, or can synchronization frequency be treated as an execution parameter that adapts to commu-nication constraints? A related line of research investigates communication-efficient variants of distributed SGD, including local up-dates and periodic averaging [14, 15]. These approaches establish that reduced synchronization can preserve con-vergence under appropriate conditions. However, the behavior of these methods is often analyzed from an optimization-theoretic perspective, and fewer studies quan-tify their systems-level impact under heterogeneous or cross-site deployments within standard DDP workflows. Moreover, periodic averaging can introduce parameter drift between workers, particularly under aggressive syn-chronization delays or large learning rates. In this work, we investigate synchronization frequency as a systems parameter in distributed training. We first quantify a backward-time inflation proxy for the commu-nication pressure inside standard DDP execution across scales and network conditions. We then study whether con-trolling synchronization frequency can improve training ro-bustness in communication-constrained environments. We implement and evaluate Controlled Periodic Data Parallelism , an execution-level synchronization strategy within standard PyTorch DistributedDataParallel. Work-ers perform multiple local updates before synchronization. At synchronization boundaries, gradients are aggregated via AllReduce to provide a synchronized gradient signal, followed by parameter averaging stabilized with SlowMo momentum [16]. The implementation operates entirely within the DDP abstraction without modifying model ar-chitectures, optimizers, or communication libraries. We evaluate CPDP on the Grid’5000 testbed [17] under two complementary settings: (i) intra-site strong scaling on ResNet-50/CIFAR-100 from 4 to 16 GPUs, and (ii) cross-site WAN training across two geographically sepa-rated Grid’5000 sites (Nancy and Sophia). We further val-idate generality on TinyImageNet and Vision Transformer (ViT-S) architectures. In all configurations, CPDP is com-pared against both standard DDP and LocalSGD, with all methods using identical hyperparameters within each configuration. Learning-rate scaling follows the protocol detailed in Section 5. We do not claim that CPDP consistently outperforms fully synchronous DDP in homogeneous high-bandwidth environments. Instead, our objective is to quantify how synchronization frequency influences system efficiency and convergence behavior, and to show that CPDP provides the most stable accuracy among periodic synchroniza-tion strategies while achieving higher peak test accuracy than DDP, under the fixed LR = 0.1 protocol, in the communication-constrained cross-site deployment. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We study synchronization frequency as a controllable systems parameter in data-parallel training, focusing on communication-constrained and cross-site WAN deployments. • We implement CPDP as a lightweight extension of Py-Torch DDP that combines periodic gradient aggrega-tion with SlowMo-stabilized parameter reconciliation, without modifying models, optimizers, or communica-tion libraries. • We provide both an indirect DDP backward-time in-flation proxy and direct exposed-synchronization pro-filing to characterize communication pressure across intra-site and cross-site settings. • We show that, under the fixed LR = 0.1 WAN proto-col, CPDP improves the accuracy–time trade-off over DDP and LocalSGD, especially at K=4.• We validate the behavior across additional workloads and analyze the sensitivity of periodic synchronization to K, learning rate, and SlowMo coefficient. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion 2 reviews prior work on distributed training and com-munication optimization. Section 3 presents the proposed 2method. Section 4 describes implementation details. Sec-tion 5 outlines the experimental methodology. Section 6 reports results and analysis. Section 7 concludes and dis-cusses future directions. 

2. Related Work 

Distributed deep neural network (DNN) training has been widely studied due to the communication overhead introduced by synchronous data-parallel execution. In this paradigm, workers repeatedly exchange gradients us-ing collective communication operations such as AllRe-duce , which can become a major scalability bottleneck as cluster size increases. Existing efforts primarily optimize collective communication primitives, scheduling strate-gies, or runtime systems, while preserving the iteration-synchronous execution model. While these directions sub-stantially improve communication efficiency, fewer stud-ies explicitly examine synchronization frequency as a con-trollable execution parameter within standard distributed training frameworks, particularly under cross-site or WAN-constrained conditions. We review the most relevant direc-tions below and position our work relative to them. 

2.1. Communication Bottlenecks in Data-Parallel Train-ing 

Synchronous data-parallel training requires frequent gra-dient aggregation across workers, typically implemented using AllReduce . As model size and cluster scale increase, communication overhead becomes a primary scalability constraint. Li et al. [1] provide a detailed characterization of PyTorch DistributedDataParallel, highlighting the tight coupling between gradient production and synchronization. Romero et al. [18] demonstrate that collective communica-tion performance often dominates the end-to-end iteration time. More recent surveys [7, 8] systematically analyze communication optimization techniques and conclude that communication increasingly appears on the critical path as accelerator throughput continues to increase. Prior studies establish communication as a structural bottleneck in distributed training. However, they preserve the conventional iteration-level synchronization model: gradients are aggregated at every mini-batch step. As a result, while communication primitives may be optimized, the execution structure itself remains unchanged, and syn-chronization boundaries are not reconsidered. 

2.2. Communication Scheduling and Overlap Techniques 

A large body of systems research focuses on reducing exposed communication latency by overlapping gradient synchronization with backpropagation. Rashidi et al. [19] leverage hardware-assisted collective execution to mitigate contention. DeAR [20] and Mercury [21] introduce fine-grained scheduling strategies to increase overlap efficiency. US-Byte [22], PipeDAP [23], and D-Credit [24] further for-malize tensor-level partitioning and communication order-ing to optimize overlap mathematically. These techniques improve how communication is sched-uled within each iteration. However, they do not recon-sider whether synchronization must occur at every iter-ation. The global barrier at each mini-batch remains in-tact, and the optimization trajectory remains fully coupled across workers. Consequently, synchronization frequency itself is not treated as a tunable execution parameter. 

2.3. Advanced Communication Frameworks and Runtimes 

Several recent works focus on improving the efficiency and adaptability of collective communication libraries. Concerto [25] and AutoCCL [26] dynamically select com-munication strategies, while ResCCL [27] improves GPU resource utilization inside collective implementations. Uni-fied communication frameworks such as UCC [31] further improve portability across heterogeneous environments. These frameworks optimize the performance of collec-tive operations but leave the training loop structure un-changed. Synchronization is still enforced at each itera-tion, and global coordination remains mandatory before progressing to the next update. Thus, although collective efficiency improves, iteration-level synchronization seman-tics are preserved. 

2.4. Local SGD and Periodic Averaging Methods 

A closely related line of research investigates periodic averaging strategies such as local SGD. Stich [14] pro-vides convergence guarantees under bounded delay, show-ing that multiple local updates can reduce communication without degrading asymptotic performance. Lin et al. [15] demonstrate that periodic averaging can outperform large-batch synchronous training at scale. Federated averaging (FedAvg) [28] further popularizes delayed synchronization in decentralized settings. Wang et al. [16] address the parameter drift problem in-herent in periodic averaging by introducing SlowMo, a slow momentum framework applied at synchronization bound-aries. SlowMo applies a momentum-filtered correction to the averaged parameters, acting as a low-pass filter over inter-worker divergence. The method demonstrates consis-tent improvements over both Local SGD and decentralized SGD across image classification and machine translation tasks. A separate line of work addresses distributed training across geographically separated sites. Gaia [29] decou-ples intra-datacenter communication from inter-datacenter communication using approximate synchronization to ap-proach LAN-speed training over WAN links. DiLoCo [30] extends periodic synchronization to language model train-ing with inner and outer optimization loops. These works demonstrate that cross-site training requires fundamen-tally different synchronization strategies than intra-site de-ployment, a finding consistent with our experimental ob-servations. 3Table 1: Taxonomy of representative approaches addressing communication overhead in distributed DNN training, categorized by optimization layer, execution model, and drift control mechanism.                                          

> Work Category Communication Scheduling Library / Runtime Execution Reorganization Iteration-Synchronous Drift Control
> DDP Optimizations [1, 18] ✓✓–✓–Overlap Scheduling [19, 20, 21] ✓––✓–Tensor-Level Scheduling [22, 23, 24] ✓––✓–Communication Frameworks [25, 26, 27] ✓✓–✓–Local SGD / Periodic Avg. [14, 15, 28] ––✓––Geo-Distributed Training [29, 30] ––✓–✓
> SlowMo [16] ––✓–✓
> CPDP (This Work, periodic synchroniza-tion study)
> ✓–✓–✓

While conceptually related, these approaches are pri-marily analyzed from an optimization-theoretic perspec-tive. They often assume modified training semantics, de-centralized control, or heterogeneous participation. More-over, these works typically do not focus on practical inte-gration into mainstream PyTorch DistributedDataParallel workflows. CPDP is closely related to Local SGD and directly builds on the SlowMo mechanism. Its distinguishing char-acteristics are operational rather than algorithmic. First, at synchronization boundaries, CPDP performs both gra-dient AllReduce (providing a synchronized gradient up-date) and parameter averaging with SlowMo correction, whereas classical Local SGD typically performs only pa-rameter averaging at synchronization steps. This dual-phase reconciliation aims to maintain stronger model con-sistency across workers, at the cost of additional commu-nication per synchronization step. Second, CPDP oper-ates entirely within the PyTorch DDP abstraction using the no_sync() context manager, without requiring custom communication libraries or modified optimizer definitions. Third, our evaluation focuses on systems-level behavior under real cross-site WAN conditions on the Grid’5000 testbed, rather than asymptotic convergence analysis. Importantly, after each synchronization step CPDP re-stores model-parameter consistency across workers: all replicas hold identical parameters once reconciliation com-pletes. This is consistency at the parameter level and does not imply equivalence to the DDP optimizer trajectory, since optimizer internal states evolve locally between syn-chronization boundaries (Section 4). 

2.5. Summary and Positioning 

Prior work mainly improves the efficiency of collec-tive communication, scheduling, or runtime execution while preserving per-iteration synchronization. LocalSGD, SlowMo, and geo-distributed methods relax this constraint by reducing synchronization frequency or stabilizing peri-odic averaging, but they are usually studied outside stan-dard DDP workflows or under different system assump-tions. CPDP occupies a practical middle ground. It treats syn-chronization frequency as an execution parameter inside PyTorch DDP, while combining gradient aggregation with SlowMo-stabilized parameter reconciliation. Table 1 sum-marizes this positioning across communication scheduling, execution reorganization, iteration-level synchronization, and drift control. 

3. Proposed Method 

3.1. Problem Setting 

We consider supervised learning over dataset D with loss function ℓ(θ; ξ) for mini-batch ξ and model parameters 

θ ∈ Rd. Training is performed across N workers. Let θi,t

denote the model parameters stored on worker i at training step t. At training step t, worker i samples a mini-batch 

Bi,t ⊂ D and computes the stochastic gradient 

gi,t ≜ ∇θℓ(θi,t; Bi,t). (1) Let η denote the learning rate. In conventional syn-chronous data-parallel SGD, gradients are aggregated at every step using AllReduce ,

¯gt = 1

N

> N

∑

> i=1

gi,t, (2) followed by identical updates across workers: 

θi,t+1 = θi,t − η¯gt. (3) This enforces per-step synchronization, introducing a global barrier that may dominate iteration time when com-munication latency is significant. 

Boundary Conditions. CPDP builds on optimization mechanisms previously studied in LocalSGD [14] and SlowMo [16]. As in these works, the loss function is as-sumed to be smooth and the stochastic gradients are as-sumed to have bounded variance. The synchronization period satisfies K ≥ 1, where K = 1

corresponds to standard synchronous DDP. The SlowMo 4momentum coefficient satisfies β ∈ [0 , 1) , with β = 0 reduc-ing the method to parameter averaging without momen-tum stabilization. The learning rate satisfies η > 0.In practice, the synchronization period and learning rate are coupled. Larger synchronization periods increase the divergence between worker trajectories during local-update phases, making periodic methods more sensitive to aggressive learning-rate scaling. This behavior is observed in the 16-GPU experiments presented in Section 6.4. If the total number of mini-batches is not divisible by 

K, the last mini-batch of the epoch is treated as a synchro-nization boundary. This ensures that all workers start the next epoch with identical parameters. 

3.2. Controlled Periodic Data Parallelism 

CPDP introduces a synchronization period K ≥ 1 that regulates communication frequency. We define a synchro-nization indicator 

st =



1, if t mod K = 0,

0, otherwise. (4) 

Local update phase. If st = 0, each worker performs an independent SGD update: 

θi,t+1 = θi,t − ηgi,t. (5) During this phase, no gradient synchronization is per-formed, and parameter trajectories may diverge across workers due to independent local SGD updates. 

Synchronization phase. When st = 1, CPDP executes a synchronization procedure composed of three stages. First, gradients are aggregated across workers via AllReduce and a synchronized optimizer step is applied: 

θi,t+1 = θi,t − η¯gt. (6) Second, to reconcile the parameter divergence accumu-lated during local updates, CPDP computes the average model across workers: 

θavg  

> t+1

= 1

N

> N

∑

> i=1

θi,t+1. (7) Parameter averaging complements gradient synchroniza-tion because the two operations address different sources of divergence. The gradient AllReduce provides a synchro-nized update at reconciliation steps, whereas parameter averaging removes the drift accumulated during the pre-ceding local-update interval. The averaged parameters then define the reference used by the SlowMo correction. After the correction, all workers hold identical model pa-rameters, while between synchronization boundaries they evolve locally. Unlike classical LocalSGD, which performs only param-eter averaging at synchronization boundaries, CPDP addi-tionally performs a gradient AllReduce step before param-eter reconciliation. This provides a synchronized gradi-ent update at reconciliation boundaries while still reducing the frequency of synchronization. In the implementation evaluated in this study, optimizer internal states are not synchronized. CPDP restores parameter consistency after each synchronization boundary, but it does not enforce optimizer-state equivalence with DDP. 

3.3. SlowMo Momentum Stabilization 

To mitigate drift induced by reduced synchronization, CPDP integrates SlowMo momentum [16] at each synchro-nization boundary. Let θref  

> t

denote the reference model stored after the previous synchronization boundary, and let vt denote the SlowMo velocity with coefficient β ∈ [0 , 1) . At synchroniza-tion: 

∆t = θavg  

> t+1

− θref  

> t

, (8) 

vt+1 ← βvt + ∆ t, (9) 

θnew  

> t+1

= θref  

> t

+ vt+1, (10) 

θi,t+1 ← θnew  

> t+1

∀i, (11) 

θref  

> t+1

← θnew  

> t+1

. (12) The SlowMo update applies a momentum-filtered cor-rection between the newly averaged parameters and the previous synchronized reference model. The velocity term 

vt accumulates these corrections over time, acting as a low-pass filter that smooths abrupt parameter changes between synchronization points. The complete training procedure of CPDP with SlowMo stabilization is summarized in Algorithm 1. The algorithm illustrates the alternation between local update phases and synchronization phases, as well as the integration of gra-dient aggregation, parameter averaging, and SlowMo mo-mentum correction at synchronization boundaries. 

3.4. Communication Complexity 

Let T denote the number of mini-batch steps per epoch. Table 2 compares the collective communication operations per epoch across the three methods evaluated in this work.         

> Table 2: Communication operations per epoch for each method.
> Method Gradient AllReduce Parameter AllReduce
> DDP ( K=1)T0LocalSGD ( K)0⌈T/K⌉
> CPDP ( K)⌈T/K⌉⌈T/K⌉

The counts in Table 2 apply to post-warmup epochs. DDP performs one gradient AllReduce per mini-batch. Lo-calSGD removes per-step gradient synchronization and av-erages parameters every K steps. CPDP performs both a gradient AllReduce and a parameter AllReduce at each synchronization boundary. Thus, CPDP is more expensive than LocalSGD per synchronization event, but it provides a synchronized gradient signal before parameter reconcili-ation, which parameter averaging alone does not provide. 5Algorithm 1 CPDP with SlowMo Momentum 

Require: Initial parameters θ, sync period K, SlowMo coefficient β, learning rate η 

> 1:

Initialize θi ← θ for all workers  

> 2:

Initialize v ← 0, θref ← θ 

> 3:

for each epoch do  

> 4:

for each step t do  

> 5:

for each worker i in parallel do  

> 6:

Sample mini-batch Bi,t ⊂ D  

> 7:

Compute gi,t ← ∇ θℓ(θi,t; Bi,t) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

if t mod K , 0 then  

> 10:

θi,t+1 ← θi,t − ηgi,t 

> 11:

else  

> 12:

¯gt ← 1

> N

∑i gi,t 

> 13:

θi ← θi − η¯gt 

> 14:

θavg  

> t+1

← 1

> N

∑i θi,t+1 

> 15:

v ← βv + (θavg  

> t+1

− θref ) 

> 16:

θnew ← θref + v 

> 17:

θi ← θnew  

> 18:

θref ← θnew  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

return θref 

This cost–benefit trade-off is evaluated empirically in Sec-tion 6.2, where exposed synchronization time is profiled di-rectly. In our implementation, optimizer states remain lo-cal between synchronization boundaries. During warmup, CPDP and LocalSGD temporarily use K = 1; all reported wall-clock times include this warmup cost. 

4. Implementation 

This section describes the implementation of CPDP within a standard distributed deep learning framework. The implementation is designed to integrate with existing distributed training pipelines without modifying model ar-chitectures, loss functions, or communication libraries. 

4.1. Distributed Execution Environment 

CPDP is implemented as an execution-layer extension over PyTorch DDP using the NCCL backend for inter-GPU communication. Each training process is bound to a single GPU and participates in a global process group initialized through environment-variable-based distributed launch. The implementation supports both single-node multi-GPU and multi-node deployments over Ethernet in-terconnects. No modifications to NCCL primitives, collec-tive algorithms, or backend communication libraries are introduced. Training data are partitioned using PyTorch’s 

DistributedSampler to ensure disjoint mini-batches across workers. For intra-site experiments, synchronized Batch Normalization is employed to maintain consistent statistics across workers. For the cross-site WAN exper-iments, synchronized Batch Normalization is disabled and per-worker BatchNorm statistics are used instead, to avoid adding an additional batch-level synchronization operation over the high-latency WAN link. This setting matches the cross-site configuration used in the reported experiments. Evaluation is performed without distributed sampling to ensure correct global accuracy measurement. For cross-site experiments, the distributed process group spans nodes located at different Grid’5000 sites, connected over the WAN. NCCL communication in this configuration uses TCP sockets over the site-to-site network link. No special configuration of NCCL transport or routing is ap-plied; the default NCCL socket-based backend is used for all inter-node communication in both intra-site and cross-site deployments. 

4.2. Synchronization Control Mechanism 

The central mechanism of CPDP is the explicit control of gradient synchronization frequency during backpropaga-tion. Given synchronization period K, gradient AllReduce is enabled only every K mini-batch steps, or at the final step of an epoch to ensure that model replicas remain syn-chronized before the next epoch begins. This behavior is implemented using DDP’s no_sync() 

context manager on non-synchronization steps, which sup-presses DDP’s gradient reduction hooks while preserving local gradient computation. On synchronization steps, 

nullcontext() is used, allowing DDP’s default NCCL-based AllReduce to execute during the backward pass. At each training step, CPDP follows a fixed execution order. First, loss.backward() is called under the appro-priate synchronization context. On synchronization steps, DDP’s gradient AllReduce is triggered during the back-ward pass, producing averaged gradients on all workers. On local steps, the no_sync() context suppresses gradient communication. Second, optimizer.step() is applied. On synchronization steps, the optimizer update uses the averaged gradients produced by DDP. On local steps, each worker updates its parameters using its own local gradi-ents. Third, on synchronization steps only, CPDP calls 

slowmo.synchronize() . This operation averages model parameters across workers, applies the SlowMo correction, and writes the reconciled values back to the model param-eters using param.data.copy_() . This step modifies only model parameter tensors. It does not modify optimizer in-ternal states such as SGD momentum buffers or AdamW first- and second-moment estimates. 

Implication for Optimizer State. Optimizer internal states therefore remain local between synchronization boundaries. CPDP restores equality of model parameters after each reconciliation step, but it does not enforce optimizer-state equivalence with standard DDP. The method should there-fore be interpreted as a parameter-reconciliation strategy 6with local optimizer state, not as an exact replication of the DDP optimizer trajectory. This distinction is relevant for both SGD and AdamW experiments. In the ResNet experiments, SGD momen-tum buffers are local. In the ViT-S experiments, AdamW moment estimates are also local. Explicit optimizer-state reconciliation is a possible implementation variant, but it was not used in the experiments reported in this study. Importantly, CPDP operates purely at the parameter synchronization layer. It does not modify optimizer up-date rules, model architectures, loss functions, or NCCL communication primitives. 

4.3. Training Protocol 

All experiments employ cosine annealing learning-rate scheduling with linear warmup. For intra-site ResNet-50 scaling experiments, the base learning rate is scaled lin-early with global batch size following standard practice, from LR = 0.1 at global batch size 256 up to LR = 0.4

at global batch size 1024. For the main cross-site WAN experiment, we use a fixed learning rate of LR = 0.1 for all three synchronization strategies and report LR = 0.4

separately as a learning-rate sensitivity setting. During warmup epochs, CPDP temporarily reverts to fully syn-chronous execution ( K = 1) to stabilize early optimization dynamics; after warmup, the configured synchronization period is restored. Learning-rate updates are applied con-sistently across all workers. The same codebase is used across all synchronization configurations, differing only in the control parameter K.To ensure deterministic behavior, random seeds are ini-tialized deterministically while incorporating the process rank to ensure reproducibility across runs while avoiding identical sampling across workers, and non-deterministic CUDA optimizations are disabled. This design ensures that observed differences in performance and convergence arise exclusively from synchronization control rather than auxiliary system optimizations. 

4.4. Instrumentation 

The training loop is instrumented to record per-epoch metrics including training loss, training accuracy, test ac-curacy, wall-clock epoch time, and throughput (images per second). Epoch time is further decomposed into four com-ponents: forward pass time ( Tfwd ), backward pass time (Tbwd ), explicit parameter synchronization time ( Tcomm ), and residual overhead. For DDP, Tcomm is not measured explicitly because gra-dient AllReduce operations are overlapped with the back-ward pass by the NCCL backend. As a result, communica-tion time is partially hidden within the backward compu-tation phase. For CPDP and LocalSGD, Tcomm captures the explicit parameter AllReduce and SlowMo correction performed outside the backward pass. This decomposition enables the estimation of DDP’s backward-time inflation proxy as discussed in Section 6. In addition, the number of gradient synchronization events and parameter reconciliation operations are tracked per epoch. All metrics are logged in structured CSV for-mat with per-epoch granularity to support reproducibility and post-hoc analysis. 

5. Experimental Setup 

This section describes the experimental setup used to evaluate CPDP, including the hardware platform, training workloads, synchronization configurations, and evaluation metrics. All experiments are designed to isolate the impact of synchronization frequency while preserving identical op-timization and system conditions. 

5.1. Experimental Platform 

Experiments are conducted on the Grid’5000 testbed, a large-scale distributed systems research infrastructure in France [17]. 

Intra-site cluster (Nancy). The graffiti cluster provides GPU-enabled nodes used for all intra-site scaling exper-iments. Each node contains two Intel Xeon Silver 4110 CPUs (8 cores per CPU), four NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPUs, 128 GB of system memory, and a 10 Gb Ethernet interconnect. Intra-site experiments scale from 4 GPUs (1 node) to 16 GPUs (4 nodes), with inter-node communication over the 10 Gb Ethernet network. 

Cross-site deployment (Nancy ↔ Sophia). Cross-site ex-periments deploy 4 GPUs on a graffiti node in Nancy and 4 GPUs on an esterel node in Sophia, for a total of 8 GPUs across two geographic sites. The esterel node provides identical CPUs and GPUs (RTX 2080 Ti), 96 GB of sys-tem memory, a 1 Gb Ethernet interface, and a 40 Gb In-finiBand adapter. In our experiments, inter-site commu-nication occurs over the Ethernet network using NCCL’s TCP socket transport, without exploiting InfiniBand ac-celeration. The measured round-trip latency between sites is approximately 16.6 ms. The two sites also differ in lo-cal interface bandwidth (10 Gb Ethernet at Nancy, 1 Gb Ethernet at Sophia), so the effective cross-site through-put is bounded by the slower 1 Gb link and the inter-site path. This asymmetry is part of the realistic WAN set-ting we evaluate; all three synchronization strategies are compared under identical network conditions, so it affects each method equally. Nodes are reserved in exclusive mode to avoid inter-ference from co-located workloads. The software stack consists of Python 3.9, PyTorch 2.4, CUDA 11.8, and NCCL 2.18. Distributed training uses PyTorch Dis-tributedDataParallel with NCCL collectives. No custom communication primitives or backend modifications are in-troduced. To ensure reproducibility, random seeds are fixed for each run using three independent seeds (42, 123, 777). CUDA deterministic execution is enabled and distributed 7process initialization is synchronized across workers. Each configuration is executed three times using the different seeds, and reported results correspond to the mean and standard deviation across these runs. No mixed-precision training, gradient compression, gradient sparsification, model sharding, or memory-saving techniques are used. All results reflect pure synchronization-control effects. 

5.2. Training Workloads 

We evaluate synchronization control across four con-figurations designed to test different aspects of the communication–accuracy trade-off. 

ResNet-50 on CIFAR-100 (Intra-site Strong Scaling). We train ResNet-50 [32] on CIFAR-100 using SGD with mo-mentum (0.9) and weight decay ( 5×10 −4). This workload is used for the primary scaling study from 4 to 16 GPUs. The per-GPU batch size is fixed at 64, yielding global batch sizes from 256 (4 GPUs) to 1024 (16 GPUs). The learn-ing rate is scaled linearly with global batch size (base LR 

= 0.1 at batch size 256). Training runs for 100 epochs with 5 warmup epochs and cosine annealing. 

ResNet-50 on CIFAR-100 (Cross-site WAN). The same ResNet-50 architecture is trained across the Nancy–Sophia WAN link on 8 GPUs (4 per site). For this configura-tion, the per-GPU batch size is 128, yielding a global batch size of 1024. The main cross-site WAN experi-ment uses a fixed learning rate of 0.1 for all three syn-chronization strategies. This configuration is reported as a stable WAN training setting rather than as a linear learning-rate scaling experiment. To characterize aggres-sive learning-rate scaling in this regime, we additionally report a cross-site LR = 0.4 diagnostic over three seeds, us-ing the main β = 0.3 configuration and applying the same linearly scaled learning rate identically to all three meth-ods. Under this setting, DDP ( K=1) reaches 77 .39 ±0.70% ,LocalSGD ( K=2) reaches 77 .31 ± 1.04% , and CPDP ( K=2)reaches 76 .65 ± 0.93% . The three methods produce close peak accuracies relative to the observed inter-seed vari-ability, with DDP marginally ahead. This contrasts with the fixed LR = 0.1 WAN protocol, under which CPDP im-proves over both baselines. We therefore interpret CPDP as improving the accuracy–time trade-off under stable syn-chronization configurations rather than universally domi-nating DDP across all learning-rate regimes, and we adopt LR = 0.1 as the main WAN comparison while reporting LR = 0.4 as a sensitivity result. The aggressive scaling also increases inter-run variability relative to the LR = 0.1

protocol; for example, CPDP increases from ±0.11% at LR = 0.1 to ±0.93% at LR = 0.4, consistent with the drift mechanism documented in Section 6.4. 

ResNet-50 on TinyImageNet (Dataset Generality). To ver-ify generalization beyond CIFAR-100, we train ResNet-50 on TinyImageNet (200 classes, 64 ×64 resolution) at two scales: 4 GPUs (1 node) and 12 GPUs (3 nodes). Hy-perparameters follow the CIFAR-100 configuration with appropriate adjustments for the larger dataset. 

ViT-S on CIFAR-100 (Architecture Generality). To eval-uate behavior on transformer architectures, we train ViT-S [33] on CIFAR-100 using AdamW with learning rate 

5 × 10 −4 and weight decay 0.05. Training runs for 200 epochs at three scales (4, 6, and 8 GPUs). This workload exhibits a higher compute-to-communication ratio than ResNet-50, allowing assessment of synchronization control when computation dominates iteration time. 

5.3. Training Configuration 

Table 3 summarizes the optimizer settings and training hyperparameters used for each workload. All synchroniza-tion strategies (DDP, CPDP, and LocalSGD) share identi-cal optimizer configurations, batch sizes, and learning rate schedules at each scale. Only the synchronization strategy differs across configurations.                                 

> Table 3: Hyperparameters for each training workload.
> Parameter ResNet-50 ViT-S
> Dataset CIFAR-100 / TinyImageNet CIFAR-100 Batch size (per GPU) 64 (intra) / 128 (cross) 64 Base learning rate 0.1 5×10 −4
> LR scaling Linear intra-site; fixed LR =0.1cross-site; LR =0.4sensitivity Fixed Optimizer SGD (mom. 0.9) AdamW Weight decay 5×10 −40.05 Epochs 100 200 Warmup epochs 5 (CIFAR-100) / 10 (TinyImageNet) 20 LR schedule Cosine Cosine SlowMo β0.3 0.3 Sync period K1, 2, 4, 8 1, 2 Seeds 42, 123, 777

The value β = 0.3 is used as the fixed CPDP configu-ration in the main experiments. Warmup is fixed within each workload and shared by all synchronization strate-gies compared in the same table. We use 5 warmup epochs for ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, 10 warmup epochs for ResNet-50/TinyImageNet, and 20 warmup epochs for ViT-S/CIFAR-100. As the SlowMo coefficient sensitivity anal-ysis in Section 6.6 shows, β = 0.3 attains the highest mean accuracy within the stable range, while overly large values destabilize training. The synchronization period K determines the number of local updates performed between synchronization steps, with K = 1 corresponding to fully synchronous DDP. Table 4 details the GPU scaling configurations used in the intra-site scaling study. The per-GPU batch size is fixed at 64, and the learning rate is scaled linearly with the global batch size following standard large-batch training practice. 8Table 4: Intra-site scaling configurations for ResNet-50/CIFAR-100.                         

> Label GPUs Nodes Global BS LR
> g4 41256 0.10 g6 62384 0.15 g8 82512 0.20 g12 12 3768 0.30 g16 16 41024 0.40

5.4. Synchronization Strategies 

We compare three synchronization strategies. The first baseline is standard synchronous data parallelism (DDP), corresponding to a synchronization period K = 1, where gradient AllReduce is performed at every mini-batch step and no parameter averaging is applied. The second baseline is LocalSGD, where workers per-form local updates between synchronization points and pe-riodically average parameters across workers using AllRe-duce, without gradient synchronization at the averaging step and without momentum correction. The primary comparison uses K = 2, and additional synchronization-period sensitivity experiments evaluate K = 4 and K = 8

where specified. The third method is CPDP, where workers also perform local updates between synchronization points, but at syn-chronization steps gradients are first aggregated via AllRe-duce, followed by parameter averaging and SlowMo mo-mentum correction. The primary comparison uses K = 2,with additional sensitivity experiments at larger synchro-nization periods. More generally, synchronization occurs whenever t mod 

K = 0. Workers therefore perform up to K − 1 local up-dates between two synchronization steps. When K = 1,synchronization occurs at every iteration, corresponding to standard synchronous data-parallel training (DDP). During warmup epochs, both CPDP and LocalSGD tem-porarily operate with K = 1 to stabilize early optimization. After warmup, the configured synchronization period is re-stored. All other hyperparameters remain identical across the three methods. For the synchronization period ablation (K-sweep), we additionally evaluate CPDP and LocalSGD at K ∈{4, 8, 16 , 32 , 64 } on the 8-GPU configuration. Values with 

K≥16 are treated as exploratory boundary-condition runs rather than recommended operating points. 

5.5. Evaluation Methodology 

Performance is evaluated using several complementary metrics. Model quality is measured using test accuracy on the held-out dataset, averaged across three indepen-dent runs. Unless otherwise stated, reported test accuracy refers to the peak (best) test accuracy over the 100-epoch run. For the main accuracy comparisons, we additionally report statistical significance using Welch’s two-sided t-test over the three random seeds, computed on this same peak test-accuracy metric. Given the limited number of seeds, we interpret p-values alongside the reported inter-run vari-ability and treat borderline cases conservatively. System performance is evaluated using the total wall-clock train-ing time across all epochs and the achieved throughput measured in processed images per second. To analyze the sources of execution time, we decompose epoch du-ration into forward pass time ( Tfwd ), backward pass time (Tbwd ), explicit synchronization time ( Tcomm ), and resid-ual overhead. In addition, we record the number of gra-dient synchronization and parameter reconciliation events per epoch. This decomposition enables the estimation of DDP’s backward-time inflation as discussed in Section 6. All metrics are aggregated using collective operations to ensure correctness, and accuracy evaluation is performed in inference mode without gradient computation. To ensure a fair comparison, all methods use identi-cal model architectures, datasets, and hyperparameters at each scale, and only the synchronization strategy dif-fers between configurations. Each experiment is executed for the same number of epochs, and results are reported as the mean and standard deviation across three inde-pendent runs. For intra-site scaling experiments, linear learning-rate scaling with respect to global batch size is applied uniformly across all methods. For the main cross-site WAN experiment, a fixed learning rate is used for all synchronization strategies to provide a stable WAN train-ing configuration. In each configuration, DDP, LocalSGD, and CPDP use the same optimizer settings, batch size, learning-rate schedule, and number of epochs, so no syn-chronization strategy benefits from method-specific tuning. Under these controlled conditions, observed performance differences can be attributed directly to the synchroniza-tion mechanism. 

6. Results and Discussion 

This section presents the evaluation of CPDP across intra-site scaling, cross-site WAN training, and multiple architectures and datasets. We compare three synchroniza-tion strategies: DDP, LocalSGD, and CPDP under iden-tical conditions at each scale. We first present the cross-site WAN results, then analyze DDP’s backward-time in-flation proxy, followed by intra-site scaling, generality ex-periments, and the synchronization period ablation. 

6.1. Cross-site WAN Training 

The cross-site configuration represents the most communication-constrained setting in our evaluation: 8 GPUs split across Nancy (graffiti, 10 GbE) and Sophia (esterel, 1 GbE), with approximately 16.6 ms round-trip la-tency between sites. Table 5 presents the results. Under the fixed LR = 0.1 WAN protocol, CPDP im-proves over both baselines at both evaluated synchroniza-tion periods. At K=2, CPDP attains 76 .12% (+2.28 per-centage points over DDP) with the lowest inter-run stan-dard deviation. At K=4, CPDP attains 76 .28% (+2.44 per-centage points over DDP and +1.77 percentage points over 9Table 5: Cross-site WAN training. ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, 8 GPUs (4 Nancy + 4 Sophia), 100 epochs. Accuracy values report mean ±                                              

> standard deviation of peak test accuracy over 3 seeds; time values report mean ±standard deviation of total wall-clock training time.
> Method KPeak Acc. (%) Time (s) vs DDP (pp)
> DDP 173 .84 ±0.23 4959 ±65 –LocalSGD 274 .12 ±0.75 6922 ±65 +0.28
> LocalSGD 474 .51 ±0.22 4170 ±41 +0.67
> CPDP 276 .12 ±0.11 7203 ±129 +2.28
> CPDP 476 .28 ±0.34 4275 ±59 +2.44

LocalSGD at the same synchronization period) while also reducing average wall-clock time by approximately 13 .8% 

relative to DDP ( 4275 s versus 4959 s on average). The two CPDP settings are not statistically different in accu-racy (Welch’s two-sided t-test, p = 0.50 ), so K=4 should not be read as more accurate than K=2; its advantage is that it reaches the same accuracy level while reducing aver-age training time below DDP. Thus, within the cross-site regime, increasing the synchronization period from K=2 to 

K=4 preserves CPDP’s accuracy advantage while turning its wall-clock cost into a wall-clock saving. However, the per-step global synchronization barrier in DDP, combined with the high latency of the cross-site WAN link, exposes each iteration to network latency and synchronization variability. As discussed in Section 6.2, DDP’s backward time increases substantially in the cross-site setting because gradient AllReduce is launched during the backward pass and overlapped with computation. This increase should not be interpreted as pure blocked commu-nication time, but it indicates that DDP’s backward phase is strongly affected by WAN communication. This behav-ior correlates with the lower peak test accuracy observed for DDP in the cross-site setting. By contrast, CPDP reduces the number of WAN syn-chronization events by a factor of K compared to DDP and replaces them with explicit synchronization phases performed after local update intervals. This reduces the exposure of the optimization process to WAN latency and network variability, resulting in more stable worker trajec-tories and improved peak test accuracy. Welch’s two-sided 

t-test over three seeds, computed on the same peak test-accuracy metric reported in the table, gives p = 0.0008 for CPDP K=2 vs. DDP and p = 0.042 for CPDP K=2 vs. Lo-calSGD K=2. Both differences are statistically significant at the 0.05 level, though the latter is interpreted conser-vatively given the small number of seeds. At K=4, CPDP improves over DDP with p = 0.0010 and over LocalSGD at the same synchronization period with p = 0.0031 , both significant at the 0.05 level. Figure 1 visualizes these peak test accuracy results un-der the fixed LR = 0.1 cross-site configuration. To quantify the effect at the conservative K=2 periodic setting, Table 6 compares each method’s cross-site accu-racy against its intra-site accuracy at the same GPU count               

> Figure 1: Cross-site WAN training on ResNet-50/CIFAR-100 with 8 GPUs distributed across Nancy and Sophia (4+4 GPUs). Bars show mean peak test accuracy over 3 seeds; error bars denote one standard deviation. Solid bars correspond to DDP ( K=1) and the conservative periodic setting ( K=2), while hatched bars correspond to K=4.Under the fixed LR =0.1WAN protocol, CPDP improves over DDP at both synchronization periods ( +2.28 percentage points at K=2,+2.44 percentage points at K=4); the two CPDP settings are not statistically different in accuracy, but K=4additionally reduces average wall-clock time below DDP.

(8 GPUs). The two settings correspond to different deploy-ment regimes by design: the intra-site point follows the linear-scaling protocol of the strong-scaling study, whereas the cross-site point uses the stable WAN learning rate. The comparison therefore characterizes end-to-end degradation between two realistic operating conditions rather than iso-lating WAN latency as a single controlled variable.     

> Table 6: Accuracy degradation from intra-site to cross-site training at the conservative K=2periodic setting (8 GPUs, ResNet-50/CIFAR-100). Mean ±standard deviation of peak test accuracy over 3 seeds. The two settings use different learning-rate protocols and global batch sizes, so the comparison reflects end-to-end change across de-ployment regimes.

Method Intra (%) Cross (%) ∆

DDP 78 .94 ± 0.50 73 .84 ± 0.23 −5.10 

LocalSGD 77 .36 ± 0.19 74 .12 ± 0.75 −3.24 

CPDP 77 .97 ± 0.44 76 .12 ± 0.11 −1.85 

DDP suffers the largest degradation ( −5.10 percentage points) when moving from intra-site to cross-site training, whereas CPDP exhibits the smallest degradation ( −1.85 

percentage points), retaining most of its intra-site accu-racy. At the conservative K=2 periodic setting, CPDP therefore demonstrates the smallest degradation across the evaluated deployment regimes. 

6.2. Communication Pressure and Direct Profiling 

In PyTorch DDP, gradient AllReduce is launched through autograd hooks and overlapped with the back-ward pass via NCCL bucketed communication. As a re-sult, DDP does not expose a separate communication-time 10 Table 7: DDP backward-time inflation proxy (per epoch). Tbwd      

> values are averaged over the last three steady-state epochs from a matched representative run. All intra-site rows were measured us-ing a matched node allocation with verified-consistent forward-pass times across methods. The “% Epoch” column reports ∆Tbwd rela-tive to the corresponding DDP epoch time. The proxy is reported as an indirect indicator of DDP backward-phase inflation, whereas Tables 8–9 report direct exposed-synchronization measurements.

Scale T DDP bwd T CPDP bwd ∆Tbwd % Epoch 

g4 17.5s 15.5s 2.0s 6.9% g8 16.5s 12.1s 4.4s 18.9% g12 15.1s 10.4s 4.7s 23.6% g16 11.5s 7.8s 3.7s 23.6% g8 (cross) 46.8s 26.3s 20.5s 41.6% 

term in simple wall-clock instrumentation. The portion of time that is truly blocked on communication cannot be measured from epoch timers alone; it would require CUDA/NCCL trace-level profiling. The CPDP timing used in this proxy corresponds to the K=2 cross-site con-figuration, so the proxy should be interpreted for the con-servative periodic setting rather than for the K=4 configu-ration. We therefore report a backward-time inflation proxy rather than an exact blocked-communication measure-ment. For DDP, Tbwd includes backward computation, overlapped gradient communication, and any synchroniza-tion waiting exposed during the backward pass. For CPDP, gradient AllReduce is suppressed during local steps using no_sync() , so its measured backward time corre-sponds to the periodic execution path without per-step gradient synchronization. However, this should not be in-terpreted as a pure-compute baseline. The CPDP back-ward path is not identical to the DDP backward path be-cause DDP communication hooks are suppressed during local steps and PyTorch’s execution context differs under 

no_sync() . We define the backward-time inflation proxy as: 

∆Tbwd = T DDP bwd − T CPDP bwd (13) This proxy should not be interpreted as pure communi-cation time or as the fraction of time blocked on the WAN link. It measures the increase in observed backward-pass time under DDP relative to the periodic execution path used by CPDP. The value may include overlapped gradient communication, synchronization waiting, and execution-context differences introduced by DDP communication hooks and the use of no_sync() . We use it only as an indi-cator of communication pressure inside DDP’s backward phase, not as a direct decomposition of communication and computation. Table 7 shows that DDP’s backward-time inflation proxy increases from 6.9% at g4 to 18 .9% at g8 and reaches 

23 .6% at g12–g16. The plateau between g12 and g16 sug-gests that intra-site communication pressure saturates un-der this 10 Gb Ethernet deployment. In contrast, the cross-                                              

> Table 8: Direct cross-site profiling of exposed synchronization time on ResNet-50/CIFAR-100 with 8 GPUs (4 Nancy + 4 Sophia), av-eraged over three seeds. “Syncs/epoch” is the number of synchro-nization events per epoch; “Per-sync” is the mean exposed time per synchronization event; “Exposed/epoch” is their product; and “Com-pute floor” is the measured communication-free compute baseline.
> Method KSyncs/epoch Per-sync Exposed/epoch Compute floor
> DDP 148 0.83 s40 .0s8.9sLocalSGD 224 1.66 s39 .9s8.9sCPDP 224 1.66 s40 .0s8.8sLocalSGD 412 1.71 s20 .5s8.9s
> CPDP 412 1.70 s20 .5s9.0s

site WAN configuration reaches 41 .6% , indicating substan-tially stronger communication pressure inside DDP’s over-lapped backward phase. The intra-site and cross-site rows correspond to different deployment regimes, so the increase in absolute backward time across these regimes reflects the network environment rather than a change in local com-pute. As discussed above, this proxy should not be inter-preted as pure blocked communication time; it is used only as an indicator of the extent to which DDP’s backward phase is affected by communication and synchronization behavior. This observation provides a possible explanation for the accuracy behavior observed in Section 6.1: the fully syn-chronous DDP execution path exposes every iteration to WAN-sensitive gradient synchronization, even though part of that communication is overlapped with computation. CPDP reduces the number of gradient synchronization events through local-update phases and explicit reconcil-iation boundaries, which lowers exposure to WAN latency at the cost of explicit reconciliation overhead. The backward-time inflation proxy above is useful for comparing communication pressure across scales, but it remains an indirect estimate because it is derived from differences in observed backward-pass time rather than from direct profiling of synchronization events. To com-plement this proxy, we therefore add direct exposed-synchronization profiling experiments. We first report the cross-site WAN profiler, where communication exposure is most critical, and then report the intra-site profiler for representative scales. This profiler measures the exposed time associated with collective synchronization events under the same cross-site deployment as Table 5. In contrast to the backward-time proxy in Table 7, this measurement is not based on sub-tracting DDP and CPDP backward-pass durations. It therefore avoids the main limitation of the proxy, namely that no_sync() changes the autograd execution context during local steps. We use the profiler to quantify exposed synchronization time directly and retain the proxy only as a scale-wise indicator of communication pressure. Table 8 confirms that the compute floor is nearly identi-cal across methods ( 8.8–9.0 s per epoch), so the observed differences are driven primarily by synchronization behav-ior. DDP performs 48 synchronization events per epoch 11 and exposes about 40 .0 s of synchronization time. At 

K=2, CPDP and LocalSGD perform only 24 synchroniza-tion events, but each event is roughly twice as expensive as a DDP event; consequently, their total exposed synchro-nization time remains comparable to DDP. This should be interpreted together with the operation counts in Table 2. At K=2, CPDP performs ⌈T/2⌉ gradi-ent AllReduce operations and ⌈T/2⌉ parameter AllReduce operations, giving the same order of collective-operation count as DDP’s T per-step gradient AllReduce operations, but with a different placement in the training step. DDP launches its gradient AllReduce operations inside the back-ward pass, where they are overlapped with computation and therefore appear as backward-time inflation rather than as a separate reconciliation phase. CPDP, by con-trast, still performs synchronized backward steps at rec-onciliation boundaries and additionally exposes parame-ter reconciliation after the optimizer step. This explains why CPDP at K=2 improves accuracy and stability but does not reduce wall-clock time: the end-to-end time in Table 5 reflects backward-pass inflation, explicit reconcili-ation, and residual overhead, not exposed synchronization time alone. At K=4, the periodic methods perform only 12 synchro-nization events per epoch. Since the per-event cost re-mains approximately constant, exposed synchronization time drops to about 20 .5 s, roughly half of DDP’s value. This is consistent with the wall-clock results in Table 5, where CPDP at K=4 preserves its accuracy advantage while reducing average training time below DDP. CPDP and LocalSGD have nearly identical exposed synchroniza-tion time at the same K, indicating that their main dif-ference lies in how the synchronized information is used for optimization rather than in measured synchroniza-tion cost at this profiler granularity. These exposed-synchronization times quantify synchronization-boundary exposure at the granularity of our profiler; they do not isolate the tensor-only SlowMo update separately. 

Intra-site exposed synchronization. Table 9 reports the same direct profiling for the intra-site configurations. Ex-posed synchronization time is much lower than in the WAN setting, remaining in the 3–10 s range per epoch. At each scale, DDP and CPDP at K=2 expose similar total syn-chronization time, confirming that the reduced frequency of CPDP can be offset by a heavier reconciliation bound-ary on fast intra-site links. The matched compute floors confirm that the measurements were collected under con-trolled execution conditions. 

6.3. Intra-Site Strong Scaling 

Table 10 reports accuracy across all three methods from 4 to 16 GPUs on the intra-site graffiti cluster. All methods use the same linear LR scaling rule (Section 5). The scaling results show three main trends. First, CPDP consistently outperforms LocalSGD at every scale, by margins ranging from +0.48 percentage points (g6) to                                                                                                           

> Table 9: Direct intra-site profiling of exposed synchronization time (ResNet-50/CIFAR-100), averaged over three seeds. Exposed/epoch is the per-epoch exposed synchronization time; the compute floor is the communication-free baseline. DDP synchronizes every step; CPDP uses K=2. Compute floors are matched between methods at each scale, confirming a controlled measurement.
> Scale Method Exposed/epoch Compute floor
> g4 DDP ( K=1)3.2s6.7sg4 CPDP ( K=2)4.2s6.6sg8 DDP ( K=1)9.8s7.6sg8 CPDP ( K=2)9.9s7.6sg12 DDP ( K=1)9.6s8.6sg12 CPDP ( K=2)10 .0s8.6sg16 DDP ( K=1)7.4s9.0sg16 CPDP ( K=2)7.7s9.0s
> Table 10: Intra-site strong scaling. ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, 100 epochs. Mean ±Std of peak test accuracy over 3 seeds.
> GPUs DDP LocalSGD CPDP CPDP–LSGD
> 479 .03 ±0.28 78 .70 ±0.22 79 .37 ±0.14 +0.67
> 678 .74 ±0.09 78 .12 ±0.34 78 .60 ±0.41 +0.48
> 878 .94 ±0.50 77 .36 ±0.19 77 .97 ±0.44 +0.61
> 12 78 .30 ±1.25 77 .12 ±2.92 78 .62 ±0.64 +1.50
> 16 76 .94 ±0.76 66 .25 ±2.06 72 .20 ±1.77 +5.95

+5.95 percentage points (g16). This confirms that the dual-phase synchronization in CPDP (gradient AllReduce followed by parameter averaging with SlowMo) provides stronger optimization trajectories than parameter averag-ing alone. The advantage grows with scale: at g16, Lo-calSGD collapses to 66 .25% under the linear learning rate scaling (LR = 0.4), while CPDP retains 72 .20% .Second, CPDP remains competitive with DDP at scales where inter-node communication contributes meaningfully to iteration time. At g4 (single node), CPDP achieves 

79 .37% versus DDP’s 79 .03% . At g12 (3 nodes), CPDP achieves 78 .62% versus DDP’s 78 .30% , with lower inter-run standard deviation ( ±0.64% versus ±1.25% ). This sug-gests that CPDP’s explicit synchronization phases provide more controlled communication behavior when inter-node communication becomes significant. Third, the accuracy gap between periodic methods and DDP widens at g16, where the aggressive learning rate (LR = 0.4) combined with reduced synchronization fre-quency leads to larger divergence. This is consistent with known effects of large-batch training with linear LR scal-ing [15]. Tuning the learning rate scaling strategy at very large global batch sizes remains an open question for all periodic synchronization methods. All periodic methods in Table 10 use K=2. As shown in Section 6.6, higher synchronization periods improve throughput while trading off accuracy at this scale. Fur-thermore, the g16 degradation observed under linear LR scaling is addressed in Section 6.4, where a more conser-12 Figure 2: Intra-site strong scaling under linear learning-rate scaling on ResNet-50/CIFAR-100. Accuracy reports mean peak test accu-racy across 3 seeds over the 100-epoch run. DDP maintains the highest accuracy at larger scales, while CPDP consistently outper-forms LocalSGD. 

vative learning-rate setting brings all three methods to within 0.31 percentage points of each other, with CPDP achieving the highest mean accuracy. To quantify degradation with scale, Table 11 reports the accuracy drop relative to the g4 baseline for each method. This captures how well each strategy maintains model quality as communication overhead grows with scale.  

> Table 11: Accuracy drop from g4 baseline (ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, linear LR scaling). Negative values indicate degradation. Section 6.4 shows that the g16 degradation for periodic methods is largely elim-inated with appropriate learning rate tuning.

Method g4 →g6 g4 →g8 g4 →g12 g4 →g16 

DDP −0.29 −0.09 −0.73 −2.09 

LocalSGD −0.58 −1.34 −1.58 −12 .45 

CPDP −0.77 −1.40 −0.75 −7.17 

At small-to-medium scales, all three methods degrade similarly. They diverge at larger scales: at g12, CPDP (−0.75 pp) matches DDP ( −0.73 pp) and improves over LocalSGD ( −1.58 pp). At g16, CPDP ( −7.17 pp) is more robust than LocalSGD ( −12 .45 pp), although DDP de-grades least overall ( −2.09 pp), consistent with its fully synchronous optimization. Figure 2 summarizes the scaling behavior across all methods. CPDP consistently improves over LocalSGD at every scale, confirming that the dual-phase reconcili-ation stabilizes periodic synchronization. However, DDP remains the most stable approach under linear learning-rate scaling, particularly at the largest scale of 16 GPUs. 

6.4. Learning-Rate and Stabilization Sensitivity at Scale 

The intra-site scaling results in Table 10 show accuracy degradation at 16 GPUs for periodic methods under ag-gressive linear learning-rate scaling (LR = 0.4). To deter-mine whether this degradation is an inherent limitation of periodic synchronization or can be recovered under a more conservative setting, we reduce the learning rate to LR = 0.2 for all three methods. For CPDP, we use the main β = 0.3 setting and additionally report a diagnostic run at LR = 0.2, β = 0.5 to illustrate the sensitivity to the SlowMo coefficient.                     

> Table 12: Learning-rate and SlowMo stabilization sensitivity at 16 GPUs. ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, 100 epochs. Mean ±standard deviation of peak test accuracy over 3 seeds. CPDP uses the main
> β=0.3setting in the first and second columns; the last column re-ports an additional CPDP diagnostic run at LR =0.2,β=0.5.“–” denotes not applicable.

Method Aggressive 

LR = 0.4

LR reduced 

LR = 0.2

CPDP diagnostic 

LR = 0.2, β = 0.5

DDP 76 .94 ± 0.76 77 .95 ± 0.12 –LocalSGD 66 .25 ± 2.06 77 .86 ± 0.21 –

CPDP 72 .20 ± 1.77 78 .17 ± 0.21 74 .31 ± 0.18 

Reducing the learning rate from LR = 0.4 to LR = 0.2

substantially improves all methods at 16 GPUs. DDP im-proves from 76 .94 ±0.76% to 77 .95 ±0.12% , while LocalSGD recovers from 66 .25 ±2.06% to 77 .86 ±0.21% . CPDP also re-covers strongly under the main β = 0.3 setting, improving from 72 .20 ± 1.77% to 78 .17 ± 0.21% . This shows that the degradation observed under aggressive linear learning-rate scaling is not an inherent failure of periodic synchroniza-tion alone; it reflects the coupling between learning rate, scale, synchronization frequency, and stabilization. The additional CPDP diagnostic run at LR = 0.2, β = 0.5

reaches only 74 .31 ± 0.18% , confirming that the SlowMo coefficient also matters at large scale. Thus, for CPDP, the large-scale recovery from 72 .20% to 78 .17% is obtained by reducing the learning rate while keeping the main β = 0.3

setting fixed. The β = 0.5 diagnostic therefore supports the choice of β = 0.3 in the main experiments. Figure 3 summarizes these results: the 16-GPU degrada-tion is largely an interaction with the learning rate rather than a failure of periodic synchronization alone, with the SlowMo coefficient acting as a secondary stability factor. 

6.5. Architecture and Dataset Generality 

To confirm that the observed patterns are not specific to ResNet-50 on CIFAR-100, we evaluate on ViT-S and TinyImageNet. 

ViT-S on CIFAR-100. Table 13 presents results for ViT-S trained with AdamW for 200 epochs.   

> Table 13: ViT-S/CIFAR-100, 200 epochs. Mean ±Std of peak test accuracy over 3 seeds.

GPUs DDP LocalSGD CPDP 

4 60 .83 ± 0.22 60 .40 ± 0.36 60 .78 ± 0.17 

6 60 .53 ± 0.45 59 .66 ± 0.60 60 .04 ± 0.38 

8 59 .51 ± 0.09 59 .26 ± 0.33 59 .90 ± 0.44 

13 Figure 3: Effect of a more conservative learning rate on 16-GPU ResNet-50/CIFAR-100 training. All methods use their main config-uration (CPDP at β = 0.3); reducing the learning rate from LR = 0.4      

> to LR =0.2improves every method. Table 12 additionally isolates the SlowMo coefficient via a CPDP diagnostic at β=0.5.

Across scales the three methods remain close, with CPDP at least matching LocalSGD and tracking DDP. At g4 and g6, DDP is marginally highest, with CPDP within 

0.05 –0.49 percentage points of DDP and above LocalSGD. At g8, CPDP attains the highest mean accuracy ( 59 .90% 

versus 59 .51% for DDP and 59 .26% for LocalSGD), al-though the difference from DDP is within the inter-run standard deviation. CPDP exceeds LocalSGD at every scale. These results show that the dual-phase synchroniza-tion behavior observed on SGD-trained ResNet-50 work-loads also extends to AdamW-trained transformers. For the ViT-S experiments, CPDP uses the same parameter-level reconciliation mechanism as in the ResNet-50 exper-iments; AdamW moment estimates are not explicitly syn-chronized. 

TinyImageNet. Table 14 presents results on TinyIma-geNet (200 classes, 64 × 64 resolution) using ResNet-50.     

> Table 14: ResNet-50/TinyImageNet, 100 epochs. Mean ±Std of peak test accuracy over 3 seeds.

GPUs DDP LocalSGD CPDP 

4 68 .15 ± 0.07 68 .27 ± 0.19 68 .50 ± 0.31 

12 66 .36 ± 0.09 64 .14 ± 0.49 65 .83 ± 0.26 

At 4 GPUs (single node), all three methods perform within 0.5 percentage points of each other, confirming that CPDP introduces no penalty when communication is negli-gible. At 12 GPUs (3 nodes), all methods degrade relative to the g4 baseline, but by different amounts: DDP drops by 1.79 points, CPDP by 2.67 points, and LocalSGD by 

4.13 points. CPDP therefore tracks DDP within roughly half a point at this scale while improving over LocalSGD by 

+1.69 points ( 65 .83% versus 64 .14% ), the largest CPDP– LocalSGD margin among the generality workloads. This indicates that the dual-phase reconciliation in CPDP pre-serves accuracy better than parameter averaging alone as inter-node communication increases, while plain periodic averaging (LocalSGD) is the most sensitive to scale on this dataset. 

6.6. Synchronization Period Ablation 

To characterize the trade-off between synchronization frequency, accuracy, and training time, we evaluate CPDP and LocalSGD at multiple synchronization periods on 8 GPUs (Table 15). This sweep uses seed 42 and is in-tended to illustrate the trend across synchronization peri-ods, not to provide a statistically validated ranking; single-seed values may therefore differ slightly from the three-seed means reported in Table 10. All methods in this sweep use the same global batch size (512) and the same LR = 0.2

schedule.      

> Table 15: Synchronization period ablation. ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, 8 GPUs, LR =0.2, global batch size 512, seed 42. All rows were measured under one launcher on the same two nodes with identical configuration. K≥16 is an exploratory regime included to map the accuracy boundary of periodic synchronization, not a recommended operating point.

Method K Acc. (%) Time (s) Speedup 

DDP 1 78 .53 1759 1.00 ×

CPDP 2 78 .22 1993 0.88 ×

CPDP 4 77 .68 1660 1.06 ×

CPDP 8 76 .09 1496 1.18 ×

CPDP 16 69 .39 1418 1.24 ×

CPDP 32 63 .70 1377 1.28 ×

CPDP 64 56 .82 1351 1.30 ×

LocalSGD 2 77 .01 1978 0.89 ×

LocalSGD 4 76 .32 1656 1.06 ×

LocalSGD 8 76 .03 1493 1.18 ×

LocalSGD 16 71 .48 1411 1.25 ×

LocalSGD 32 63 .17 1371 1.28 ×

LocalSGD 64 59 .00 1348 1.31 ×

The K-sweep highlights three main observations. First, in the practical range of small synchronization periods (K≤4), CPDP improves over LocalSGD by +1.21 percent-age points at K=2 (78 .22% versus 77 .01% ) and +1.36 points at K=4 (77 .68% versus 76 .32% ), and matches it at K=8

(76 .09% versus 76 .03% ). The dual-phase reconciliation in CPDP is most effective when synchronization remains fre-quent enough to control model drift while still reducing communication. At larger periods, both methods lose sub-stantial accuracy as workers diverge between reconciliation points, and the ranking between them is no longer the rel-evant comparison. Second, accuracy decreases with K while throughput increases, tracing a clear accuracy–time frontier. At 

K=4, CPDP reaches 77 .68% , within 0.85 points of DDP (78 .53% ), at a 1.06 × speedup while synchronizing four times less frequently; this is the most favorable operat-14 Figure 4: Effect of synchronization period K on training accu-racy and speedup relative to DDP (ResNet-50/CIFAR-100, 8 GPUs, LR = 0.2, seed 42). Increasing K reduces synchronization frequency and improves throughput but increases inter-worker drift; the best accuracy–time trade-off is environment-dependent. 

ing point in this intra-site setting. At K=8, CPDP re-tains 76 .09% at a 1.18 × speedup. At K=2, where synchro-nization is still frequent, the explicit reconciliation phases place both periodic methods slightly below DDP in run-time ( 0.88 × and 0.89 ×) on this fast intra-site interconnect. Third, the exploratory large-period sweep (K ∈{16 , 32 , 64 }) identifies the boundary beyond which periodic synchronization is no longer effective for this workload: ac-curacy falls from the high-70 s at K≤4 to the high-60 s at 

K=16 and the high-50 s at K=64 , while speedup saturates near 1.30 ×. The communication savings remain real, but beyond a moderate K the accuracy loss dominates. The useful range for this workload is therefore K ∈ { 2, 4}, with 

K=8 as the upper bound where accuracy stays within a few points of DDP. Consistent with the timing results in Table 15, increas-ing K reduces the number of synchronization boundaries and improves wall-clock speedup, but the accuracy loss be-comes dominant beyond moderate values of K. Thus, the useful operating region is determined by the accuracy–time trade-off, not by communication reduction alone. The cross-site results in Table 5 confirm that the best K

is environment-dependent. Intra-site, K=4 gives the best accuracy–time trade-off; cross-site, moving from K=2 to 

K=4 preserves a statistically comparable CPDP accuracy level while reducing average time from 7203 s to 4275 s. Thus, K should be selected for the communication envi-ronment rather than fixed a priori. In intra-site configurations, where communication la-tency is substantially lower, K=4 or K=8 provide stronger accuracy–throughput trade-offs. A broader WAN-specific sweep beyond K=4, potentially combined with adap-tive learning-rate schedules or parameter-drift mitigation mechanisms, remains an interesting direction for future work. Figure 4 plots the resulting accuracy–time frontier across synchronization periods. 

SlowMo Coefficient Sensitivity. Table 16 shows that CPDP is stable for moderate SlowMo coefficients. The best mean peak accuracy is obtained at β = 0.3 (79 .38% ),                                                   

> Table 16: SlowMo coefficient sensitivity for CPDP on ResNet-50/CIFAR-100 at intra-site g4 ( K=2, LR =0.1, 100 epochs). Values report mean ±standard deviation over three seeds. Late-epoch std is computed over the final 10 epochs and averaged across seeds.
> βPeak acc. (%) Final acc. (%) Late-epoch std
> 0.0 78 .74 ±0.17 78 .64 ±0.14 0.071
> 0.3 79 .38 ±0.13 79 .19 ±0.13 0.069
> 0.5 78 .90 ±0.33 78 .84 ±0.33 0.087
> 0.7 76 .77 ±0.24 76 .71 ±0.17 0.229
> 0.9 31 .56 ±1.08 1.00 ±0.00 —

with the lowest late-epoch standard deviation. The dif-ference between β = 0.3 and β = 0.5 is modest and not statistically significant over three seeds (Welch’s two-sided 

t-test, p = 0.12 ), so we do not claim optimality. However, larger values degrade stability: β = 0.7 reduces accuracy, and β = 0.9 collapses training. We therefore use β = 0.3

as the fixed CPDP configuration in the main experiments and leave a joint search over β, K, and the learning-rate schedule to future work. 

6.7. Discussion 

The experiments show that synchronization frequency is a practical systems parameter for distributed training. Its useful range depends on the network, the workload compute-to-communication ratio, and the amount of pa-rameter drift tolerated between synchronization points. In fast intra-site settings, DDP remains highly competitive because communication is largely overlapped with back-propagation. In this regime, CPDP is most useful when 

K is large enough to reduce synchronization overhead but still small enough to avoid excessive drift. The cross-site WAN results show a different behavior. Under the fixed LR = 0.1 WAN protocol, CPDP at K=2

improves accuracy but remains slower than DDP because reconciliation is still frequent. At K=4, the lower synchro-nization frequency reduces exposed synchronization time and yields both higher accuracy and lower wall-clock time than DDP. This confirms that the best synchronization pe-riod is environment-dependent rather than fixed a priori. 

Practical guidance for selecting K. The profiler provides a measurement-based basis for choosing K. Since each CPDP reconciliation boundary is roughly twice as costly as a single DDP synchronization (Table 8), savings ap-pear only when the reduced synchronization frequency out-weighs this per-boundary cost: at K=2 the effects can-cel, whereas at K=4 exposed synchronization time falls to roughly half. A practical rule is to increase K until exposed synchronization no longer dominates the epoch, then stop before accuracy degrades. In our experiments, this points to K=4 for both the intra-site and WAN settings, with 

K=2 as the conservative stable starting point. Across periodic methods, CPDP generally improves over LocalSGD in the practical range K≤4, indicating 15 that gradient reconciliation plus SlowMo stabilization pro-vides stronger consistency than parameter averaging alone. However, the large-K sweep shows that communication re-duction cannot be pushed indefinitely: beyond moderate 

K, local drift dominates and accuracy decreases sharply. CPDP therefore improves the accuracy–time trade-off only when the synchronization period, learning rate, and stabi-lization coefficient are jointly suitable. 

Limitations. The current study is empirical and limited to 4–16 GPUs, one cross-site WAN pair, and vision work-loads. CPDP builds on LocalSGD and SlowMo under the smoothness and bounded-variance assumptions stated in Section 3.1, but we do not provide a new convergence the-orem for the combined update under WAN delay, hetero-geneous communication cost, and local optimizer states. We also do not compare with gradient compression meth-ods such as PowerSGD [34], which are orthogonal to synchronization-frequency control. The implementation reconciles model parameters but not optimizer internal states; SGD momentum buffers and AdamW moment esti-mates remain local between synchronization boundaries. Future work should study adaptive K selection, for ex-ample by treating K as a learnable parameter through differentiable-programming approaches [35, 36], as well as larger NLP workloads, higher-latency WAN settings, and optimizer-state reconciliation. 

7. Conclusion 

This paper studied synchronization frequency as a controllable systems parameter for communication-constrained data-parallel training. We evaluated CPDP, a PyTorch-DDP-compatible strategy that alternates local updates with a dual reconciliation step combining gradient AllReduce and SlowMo parameter averaging. On Grid’5000, CPDP improved over LocalSGD across the practical synchronization range and achieved the strongest accuracy–time trade-off in the cross-site WAN setting. Under the fixed LR = 0.1 WAN protocol, CPDP improved over DDP by +2.28 percentage points at K=2

but with additional wall-clock time. At K=4, it improved over DDP by +2.44 percentage points while reducing aver-age training time by 13 .8% . Direct profiling confirmed that increasing the synchronization period reduces exposed syn-chronization time in the WAN setting. The results also show that synchronization control is not universally beneficial without tuning. Large synchro-nization periods and aggressive learning rates can degrade periodic methods, while more conservative learning-rate settings can recover performance. Overall, CPDP demon-strates that synchronization frequency, when combined with drift-aware reconciliation, can improve distributed training behavior under communication constraints. 

Data availability 

The implementation and experiment configurations will be made publicly available after publication of the manuscript. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by the National Center for Scientific and Technical Research (CNRST), Morocco, un-der the PhD-Associate Scholarship (PASS) program. Experiments presented in this paper were carried out using the Grid’5000 testbed, supported by a scientific in-terest group hosted by Inria and including CNRS, RE-NATER, and several universities and other organizations (see https://www.grid5000.fr ). 

References 

[1] S. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Varma, O. Salpekar, P. Noordhuis, T. Li, A. Paszke, J. Smith, B. Vaughan, P. Dama-nia, S. Chintala, PyTorch distributed: experiences on accelerating data parallel training, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 13 (12) (2020) 3005–3018. 

doi:10.14778/3415478.3415530 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.14778/3415478. 3415530 

[2] J. Liu, Z. Wu, D. Feng, M. Zhang, X. Wu, X. Yao, D. Yu, Y. Ma, F. Zhao, D. Dou, HeterPS: Dis-tributed deep learning with reinforcement learning based scheduling in heterogeneous environments, Future Generation Computer Systems 148 (2023) 106–117. doi:10.1016/j.future.2023.05.032 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0167739X23002157 

[3] S. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Shi, GPARS: Graph pre-dictive algorithm for efficient resource scheduling in heterogeneous GPU clusters, Future Gener-ation Computer Systems 152 (2024) 127–137. 

doi:10.1016/j.future.2023.10.022 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0167739X23003953 

[4] J. Liu, Z. Duan, X. Hu, J. Zhong, Y. Yin, Detrack-ing autoencoding conditional generative adversarial network: Improved generative adversarial network method for tabular missing value imputation, En-tropy 26 (5) (2024) 402. doi:10.3390/e26050402 .[5] Z. Hou, B. Wang, J. Liu, Y. He, Y. Yao, Physics-inspired time-frequency feature extraction and lightweight neural network for power quality dis-turbance classification, Frontiers in Physics 13 (2025) 1616367. doi:10.3389/fphy.2025.1616367 .16 [6] J. Liu, Z. Hou, Establishment of Second-Hand Sail-boats price prediction model based on Random Forest and exploration of influencing factors, in: 2023 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Data Science and Computer Application (ICDSCA), 2023, pp. 1337– 1342. doi:10.1109/ICDSCA59871.2023.10393007 .[7] E. Yu, D. Dong, X. Liao, Communication opti-mization algorithms for distributed deep learning systems: A survey, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 34 (12) (2023) 3294–3308. 

doi:10.1109/TPDS.2023.3323282 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/10275049 

[8] Y. Wei, T. Hu, C. Liang, Y. Cui, Communication optimization for distributed training: Architecture, advances, and opportunities, IEEE Network 39 (3) (2025) 241–248. doi:10.1109/MNET.2024.3449276 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/10663574 

[9] W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Jin, H. Tian, Z. Zhong, G. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Chen, Understanding communication characteristics of distributed training, in: Proceedings of the 8th Asia-Pacific Workshop on Networking, AP-Net ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 1–8. doi:10.1145/3663408.3663409 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3663408. 3663409 

[10] Z. Ye, W. Gao, Q. Hu, P. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Luo, T. Zhang, Y. Wen, Deep learning workload scheduling in GPU datacenters: A survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 56 (6) (2024) 146:1–146:38. doi:10.1145/3638757 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3638757 

[11] C. Hwang, K. Park, R. Shu, X. Qu, P. Cheng, Y. Xiong, ARK: GPU-driven code execution for dis-tributed deep learning, in: 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23), 2023, pp. 87–101. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/ nsdi23/presentation/hwang 

[12] C. Chen, X. Li, Q. Zhu, J. Duan, P. Sun, X. Zhang, C. Yang, Centauri: Enabling efficient scheduling for communication-computation overlap in large model training via communication partitioning, in: Proceed-ings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Ar-chitectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3, Vol. 3 of ASPLOS ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 178– 191. doi:10.1145/3620666.3651379 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3620666. 3651379 

[13] J. Cao, Y. Guan, K. Qian, J. Gao, W. Xiao, J. Dong, B. Fu, D. Cai, E. Zhai, Crux: GPU-efficient com-munication scheduling for deep learning training, in: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Confer-ence, ACM SIGCOMM ’24, Association for Com-puting Machinery, 2024, pp. 1–15. doi:10.1145/ 3651890.3672239 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3651890. 3672239 

[14] S. U. Stich, Local SGD converges fast and communi-cates little (2019). arXiv:1805.09767[math] , doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1805.09767 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09767 

[15] T. Lin, S. U. Stich, K. K. Patel, M. Jaggi, Don’t use large mini-batches, use local SGD (2020). arXiv:1808.07217[cs] , doi:10.48550/ arXiv.1808.07217 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.07217 

[16] J. Wang, V. Tantia, N. Ballas, M. Rabbat, SlowMo: Improving communication-efficient distributed SGD with slow momentum, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020, pp. 1–27. [17] D. Balouek, A. Carpen Amarie, G. Charrier, F. Desprez, E. Jeannot, E. Jeanvoine, A. Lèbre, D. Margery, N. Niclausse, L. Nussbaum, O. Richard, C. Pérez, F. Quesnel, C. Rohr, L. Sarzyniec, Adding virtualization capabilities to the Grid’5000 testbed, in: I. I. Ivanov, M. van Sinderen, F. Leymann, T. Shan (Eds.), Cloud Computing and Services Science, Vol. 367 of Communications in Computer and Information Science, Springer International Publishing, 2013, pp. 3–20. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-04519-1\_1 .[18] J. Romero, J. Yin, N. Laanait, B. Xie, M. T. Young, S. Treichler, V. Starchenko, A. Borisevich, A. Sergeev, M. Matheson, Accelerating collective communication in data parallel training across deep learning frameworks, in: 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 22), 2022, pp. 1027–1040. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/ nsdi22/presentation/romero 

[19] S. Rashidi, M. Denton, S. Sridharan, S. Srinivasan, A. Suresh, J. Ni, T. Krishna, Enabling compute-communication overlap in distributed deep learning training platforms, in: 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2021, pp. 540–553. arXiv:2007.00156[cs] ,

doi:10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00049 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/9499904 

[20] L. Zhang, S. Shi, X. Chu, W. Wang, B. Li, C. Liu, DeAR: Accelerating distributed deep learning with fine-grained all-reduce pipelining, in: 2023 IEEE 43rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2023, pp. 142–153. 17 doi:10.1109/ICDCS57875.2023.00054 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/10272398 

[21] Q. Duan, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, S. Liu, J. Wu, Mercury: A simple transport layer scheduler to accelerate distributed DNN training, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2022 –IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2022, pp. 350–359. 

doi:10.1109/INFOCOM48880.2022.9796820 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/9796820 

[22] Y. Gao, B. Hu, M. B. Mashhadi, A.-L. Jin, P. Xiao, C. Wu, US-byte: An efficient communication frame-work for scheduling unequal-sized tensor blocks in distributed deep learning, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 35 (1) (2024) 123–139. doi:10.1109/TPDS.2023.3331372 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/10314018 

[23] Y. Gao, B. Hu, M. B. Mashhadi, W. Wang, R. Tafazolli, M. Debbah, PipeDAP: An effi-cient communication framework for scheduling decoupled all-reduce primitives in distributed DNN training, IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing 13 (3) (2025) 1170–1184. 

doi:10.1109/TETC.2025.3573522 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/11021340 

[24] Y. Gao, B. Hu, M. B. Mashhadi, W. Wang, R. Tafa-zolli, M. Debbah, A dynamic sliding window based tensor communication scheduling framework for distributed deep learning, IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 12 (2) (2025) 1080–1095. doi:10.1109/TNSE.2024.3523320 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 10816583/ 

[25] S. Cheng, S. Lin, L. Diao, H. Wu, S. Wang, C. Si, Z. Liu, X. Zhao, J. Du, W. Lin, Y. You, Concerto: Automatic communication optimization and schedul-ing for large-scale deep learning, in: ASPLOS ’25: 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ACM, 2025, pp. 198–213. doi:10.1145/ 3669940.3707223 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3669940. 3707223 

[26] G. Xu, Z. Le, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, Z. Jin, Y. Miao, C. Li, AutoCCL: Automated collective communication tuning for accelerating distributed and parallel DNN training, in: 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25), 2025, pp. 667–683. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/ nsdi25/presentation/xu-guanbin 

[27] T. Liu, C. Hei, F. Li, C. Gao, J. Cao, T. Wang, E. Zhai, X. Wang, ResCCL: Resource-efficient scheduling for collective communication, in: Proceed-ings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference, SIG-COMM ’25, Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, pp. 55–70. doi:10.1145/3718958.3750514 .URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3718958. 3750514 

[28] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hamp-son, B. A. y. Arcas, Communication-efficient learn-ing of deep networks from decentralized data (2023). arXiv:1602.05629[cs] , doi:10.48550/ arXiv.1602.05629 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05629 

[29] K. Hsieh, A. Harlap, N. Vijaykumar, D. Konomis, G. R. Ganger, P. B. Gibbons, O. Mutlu, Gaia: Geo-distributed machine learning approaching lan speeds, in: NSDI, 2017, pp. 629––647. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/ nsdi17/technical-sessions/presentation/ hsieh 

[30] A. Douillard, Q. Feng, A. A. Rusu, R. Chha-paria, Y. Donchev, A. Kuncoro, M. Ranzato, A. Szlam, J. Shen, DiLoCo: Distributed low-communication training of language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08105 (2023). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2311.08105 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08105 

[31] M. G. Venkata, V. Petrov, S. Lebedev, D. Bu-reddy, F. Aderholdt, J. Ladd, G. Bloch, M. Dub-man, G. Shainer, Unified collective communi-cation (UCC): An unified library for CPU, GPU, and DPU collectives, in: 2024 IEEE Symposium on High-Performance Interconnects (HOTI), 2024, pp. 37–46, ISSN: 2332-5569. 

doi:10.1109/HOTI63208.2024.00018 .URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/ document/10664373 

[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition (2015). arXiv:1512. 03385[cs] , doi:10.48550/arXiv.1512.03385 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 

[33] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weis-senborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszko-reit, N. Houlsby, An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale (2021). arXiv:2010.11929[cs] , doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2010.11929 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929 

18 [34] T. Vogels, S. P. Karimireddy, M. Jaggi, Pow-ersgd: Practical low-rank gradient compression for distributed optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 14236– 14245. [35] L. Tao, X. Tong, C. W. Tan, Learning to optimize by differentiable programming (2026). arXiv:2601. 16510 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.16510 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.16510 

[36] M. Blondel, V. Roulet, The elements of differen-tiable programming (2025). arXiv:2403.14606 , doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2403.14606 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14606 

Appendix A. Additional Experimental Results 

This appendix provides additional experimental results that complement the analysis presented in Section 6. The figures included here illustrate convergence behavior, communication–accuracy trade-offs, and additional work-load evaluations across architectures and datasets. These plots are not required for the main narrative but provide additional transparency regarding training dynamics. 

Appendix A.1. Training Convergence Curves    

> Figure A.5: Training convergence curves for ResNet-50 on CIFAR-100 at 8 GPUs. Shaded regions represent mean ±standard deviation across three seeds.

Figure A.5 and Figure A.6 show the full training conver-gence curves for ResNet-50 on CIFAR-100 at two represen-tative scales (8 GPUs and 16 GPUs). Curves correspond to the mean test accuracy across three independent runs, with shaded regions indicating the standard deviation. At 8 GPUs (Figure A.5), all methods converge to sim-ilar peak test accuracy values, with DDP achieving the highest peak test accuracy and CPDP consistently outper-forming LocalSGD throughout training. The curves show that CPDP stabilizes optimization trajectories relative to LocalSGD, which exhibits slightly noisier convergence. At 16 GPUs (Figure A.6), the effect of large-batch learn-ing rate scaling becomes more pronounced. LocalSGD diverges early under the linear scaling rule, while CPDP maintains a more stable trajectory. DDP remains the most stable method under these conditions, consistent with the scaling results reported in Section 6.3.  

> Figure A.6: Training convergence curves for ResNet-50 on CIFAR-100 at 16 GPUs. LocalSGD diverges under aggressive learning-rate scaling, while CPDP maintains more stable convergence.

Appendix A.2. Accuracy–Time Trade-Off 

To better illustrate the relationship between wall-clock efficiency and model quality, Figure A.7 illustrates the re-lationship between wall-clock training time and test accu-racy for the 8-GPU configuration. The figure is included only as a qualitative view of training dynamics; the quan-titative accuracy–time comparison is reported in the main tables. CPDP retains higher peak test accuracy than Lo-calSGD while maintaining comparable training speed.  

> Figure A.7: Accuracy as a function of wall-clock training time for ResNet-50/CIFAR-100 at 8 GPUs. This plot provides a qualitative view of convergence dynamics; quantitative accuracy and timing com-parisons are reported in the main tables.

For the cross-site configuration, the accuracy–time re-lationship is shown in Figure A.8. The figure highlights the strong impact of WAN communication on fully syn-chronous training. 

Appendix A.3. Additional Workloads 

We include additional training curves for the ViT-S and TinyImageNet workloads to illustrate convergence behav-ior across architectures and datasets. Figure A.9 shows convergence curves for ViT-S on CIFAR-100. The ordering remains broadly consistent with the main results: CPDP consistently improves over Lo-calSGD and remains close to DDP. At 8 GPUs, CPDP ob-tains the highest mean accuracy, although the difference from DDP remains within the observed inter-run variabil-ity. 19 Figure A.8: Accuracy as a function of wall-clock training time for the cross-site WAN configuration. DDP reaches its peak earlier, whereas CPDP at K=2 requires more wall-clock time but ultimately achieves higher peak test accuracy. The main K=4 results, for which CPDP reduces training time below DDP, are reported in Table 5. 

Figure A.9: Training curves for ViT-S on CIFAR-100 (4 GPUs). CPDP consistently improves over LocalSGD and remains close to DDP accuracy. 

Figure A.10 presents convergence curves for ResNet-50 on TinyImageNet at 12 GPUs. The results show mini-mal differences between synchronization strategies at early stages of training, with CPDP maintaining stable conver-gence as scale increases. 

Figure A.10: Training curves for ResNet-50 on TinyImageNet at 12 GPUs. CPDP maintains stable convergence as inter-node communi-cation increases. 

20